# The ICFP Bound Variable problem

This is my implementation of the 2006 ICFP bound variable problem (full solution in
[SOLUTION.md](solution%2FSOLUTION.md)).

See http://www.boundvariable.org/task.shtml for the original task description.
The following is my markdown version of it.

## Problem statement

Dear Colleague:

In 1967, during excavation for the construction of a new shopping center in Monroeville, Pennsylvania, workers uncovered
a vault containing a cache of **ancient scrolls**. Most were severely damaged, but those that could be recovered
confirmed the existence of a secret society long suspected to have been active in the region around the year 200 BC.

Based on a translation of these documents, we now know that the society, the Cult of the Bound Variable, was devoted to 
the careful **study of computation**, over two millennia before the invention of the digital computer.

While the Monroeville scrolls make reference to computing machines made of sandstone, most researchers believed this to 
be a poetic metaphor and that the "computers" were in fact the initiates themselves, carrying out the unimaginably
tedious steps of their computations with reed pens on parchment. A few have conjectured **a city-sized machine** powered
by falling sand, but no physical evidence of such a device has been discovered.

Among the documents found intact in the Monroeville collection was a **lengthy codex**, written in no known language and 
inscribed with superhuman precision. It is believed to be the masterwork of the Cult's scholarship, and as such it 
carries immense potential to advance our understanding of historyâ€”and possibly of computing as well. Unfortunately, the 
codex eluded interpretation, and over the decades, study of the Monroeville scrolls has slipped into obscurity. Since 
1978, the codex has been stored in the basement of the Carnegie Museum of Natural History.

Two weeks ago, during a visit to the excavation site for a new computer science building at CMU, workers discovered a 
set of inscribed tablets that proved to be the **Rosetta Stone for interpreting the Monroeville codex**. The tablets 
precisely specify the Cult's computing device, known to initiates as **the "Universal Machine."** Although there is
still no evidence that the cult succeeded in constructing their machine, it is a reasonably simple task to emulate it on
modern hardware.

We can now say with certainty that **the codex is in fact a program, intended for execution on the Universal Machine.**
Our initial exploration of the codex suggests that the Cult's ideas about programming were very sophisticated, if 
somewhat peculiar to the modern eye. One cannot help but wonder what the Cult might have achieved had they had access to
modern electronics and type theory.

I have enlisted the help of the CMU Principles of Programming group in creating a venue for study of the codex. We 
invite you to participate in this investigation. The codex and a translation of the Universal Machine (UM) specification
are available for download from our web site. We encourage you to implement the UM and begin your own exploration of the
codex. When you are prompted to enter a **decryption key**, type the following string:

```
(\b.bb)(\v.vv)06FHPVboundvarHRAk
```

The **Cult's scholarly publications** are of particular interest to us. Because the Cult's journals were circulated on
sandstone tablets, editors imposed very strict length limitations. Consequently, authors aggressively compressed their
articles. A typical publication would have the following form:

```
PUZZL.TSK=100@1001|14370747643c6d2db0a40ecb4b0bb65
```

Publications are of varying value; some will represent a greater contribution than others. Given our understanding of
the Cult's publication process, we believe there is a **mechanism within the codex** that will verify a set of 
publications and compute their total value.

On a personal note, being inspired by the scholarship of the Cult, I have decided to dedicate the remainder of my days
to a solitary study of computation and programming languages. However, before embarking on my monastic transformation, I
wish to see that the world is well on its way to uncovering the secrets of the Codex.

Therefore, I ask that you submit as many publications as you can by noon EDT on July 24, 2006, at which time I will be 
taking my orders. My colleagues in the CMU POP group assure me that at that time, the teams that have made the greatest 
contribution to the effort shall be identified for special recognition.

Good luck and thank you for your assistance.

Sincerely,

Professor Emeritus Harry Q. Bovik
Computational Archaeolinguistics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University

## Material

These are the files provided as material from the website, available in this repository in the `material` directory:

* `um-spec.txt`: Specification for the Universal Machine

* `codex.umz`: The codex (Volume ID 9).

* `codex-decryption-key.txt`: The decryption key `(\b.bb)(\v.vv)06FHPVboundvarHRAk` for the codex, as a text file. 

* `sandmark.umz`: Benchmark for the Universal Machine

* `sandmark-expected-output.txt`: The expected output of the benchmark if the machine works properly.

* `um.um`: CMU Reference implementation of the Universal Machine.
   This implementation supports all UM programs, including uncompressed .um files and self-decompressing .umz files.
   To use this implementation to run a UM binary called c.um, simply concatenate the two files together:
   ```
   cat um.um c.um > cmu.um
   ```
   The resulting binary can be run in any compliant universal machine implementation, including itself.

## License 

This work is published with the MIT License.
